>> A recent study sheds light on
the remarkable case of a woman
who grew up without a key part
of her brain and was barely
affected by it.
This is a "Gaia News Breakdown."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In the endless search
to understand the workings
of the human mind, scientists
take special interest in cases
of the most unique brains.
The most recent
and fascinating is
that of a woman known
by her initials EG.
Now in her 50s, EG first
learned that her brain
was atypical in her 20s
when she had it scanned
for an unrelated reason.
She was told then that
she had been missing
her left temporal lobe from
infancy, most likely the result
of an early stroke.
This part of the
brain is thought
to be involved with language
processing, which makes
EG's story so extraordinary.
Despite being repeatedly
told by doctors
that she should
have major cognitive
deficits and
neurological issues,
EG has a graduate degree, has
enjoyed an impressive career,
and speaks Russian
as a second language.
Several years ago, EG met
Dr. Evelina Fedorenko,
a cognitive neuroscientist
at MIT who studies language.
Dr. Fedorenko was immediately
fascinated by EG's case
and conducted a number of
studies, the first of which
was recently published in the
Journal "Neuropsychologia."
As part of the study, EG
took a vocabulary test
and scored in the
98th percentile.
Brain imaging revealed
that in the absence
of EG's left temporal lobe,
the task of language processing
seems to have shifted over
to her right hemisphere.
Ella Striem-Amit, a
cognitive neuroscientist
at Georgetown
University, told "Wired,"
quote, "The remarkable
thing about this patient
and other such patients
who were missing
large chunks of their
language system at birth
is how well they compensate."
For EG, the study has
been a welcome validation
after decades of being
made to feel defective.
As she wrote in the
published paper,
quote, "Please do not
call my brain abnormal.
My brain is atypical.
If not for accidentally
finding these differences,
no one would pick me
out of a crowd as likely
to have these or any
other differences
that make me unique."
Fedorenko's team plans to
conduct several more studies
on EG and expects to come
away with an even richer
understanding of the brain's
seemingly limitless potential
for flexibility and adaptation.
EG hopes that, quote, "It will
also take some stigma away
from atypical brains."
For a new perspective, this has
been a "Gaia News Breakdown."
For more information
on this topic,
check out this content on Gaia.